hi everyone lost la Montgomery again
bringing you episode 159 after those two
recent qing dynasty episodes and all
that killing gore and bodies ripped
apart i thought i'd select a topic this
time it wasn't so gruesome and dripping
with blood those two chains that was a
64 ounce porterhouse steak char rare
this episode will be a little lighter
fare but I hope no less entertaining and
informative this topic has been on the
list for quite a while I don't know why
it took so long to finally get to it if
you have a certain generation or two you
may remember a few of these names and TV
shows I'll mention later on this is one
of those topics that turned out to be
much bigger than I realize rather than
offer up some sprawling multi-part
series I thought it would stick to what
I felt historically was the real story
this is Chinese history as much as any
other topic I've introduced over the
years the history of the Chinese didn't
just happen in China the real story is
not about the movies and the Chinese
moviemaking pioneers like Marion wang s
terang James be long and Joseph son jus
today's main focus looks at the half
century between about 1915 to the early
1960s the main point of this episode
isn't so much the biographies of these
Chinese Americans I wanted to use a few
examples as a window into the times when
they were trying to build their American
Dream in the entertainment business the
Chinese faced a great wall of overt and
quiet racism and bigotry that was
pervasive throughout early in mid 20th
century American society today's story
looks at this as it related to Hollywood
and the entertainment business it seems
that any ethnic group who didn't come
over on the Mayflower at one time or
another had to run the gauntlet of
society's disapproval until the time
came when they were able to carve out
their place in this fair land if someone
was polish or russian or german at the
irish even though they might have been
fresh off the boat and had a long row to
hoe ahead of them their white skin was
often the ticket they needed to
dissipate without any resistance in all
the opportunities America had to offer
without that requisite skin color the a
debate dues these dues were paid in all
kinds of well-known ways here at the
China history podcast we looked at this
topic in episode 44 on the chinese
exclusion laws six decades in the USA no
Chinese allowed CHP 123 the history of
the Chinese in Mexico we looked at the
struggles Chinese faced trying to eke
out a living south of the border and
also in episode 136 on Wang Qin foo
someone so brilliantly brought to life
by the great author Scott Seligmann in
his book the first chinese-american
through the life of Wang Qin foo we
looked at the struggles Chinese
Americans faced leading up to and after
the enactment of the 1882 exclusion laws
including the Scott and Gary X in this
episode our main focus will be on the
struggles and achievements of chinese
americans in hollywood japanese koreans
vietnamese filipinos indians all the
races of asia who lived here as citizens
have their own similar versions of many
of these stories in studying about the
lives of many of these chinese-american
stars of old Hollywood and the broader
entertainment business the one theme the
kept on coming up was there weren't many
leading roles created for Asians in the
movies in the theater or later on when
TV came into being if the mainstream was
off limits then parts actually had to be
created that were suited for an Asian
character as pigeon-holed by studio
execs and the masses who flocked to see
these movies in reflecting on the
challenges facing today's generation of
talented Chinese American actors or
actresses trying to make it in Hollywood
let's look at the life of anime Wang
Anna May Wong Hwang Leo Shuang she was
the first which she became the biggest
Chinese star in Hollywood in the 1920s
and 30s she did it alone there were many
other Chinese American actors and act
is that came before her and who were her
contemporaries but Anna May Wong she was
the brand like the others I'm gonna
mention she started off in the era of
silent films early talkies and
black-and-white TV the movie stills and
publicity photos you could find online
of Anna May Wong shows someone who had
the entire package as for feminine
beauty as idealized in the American
orientalism of the time that sort of
fetishization of Asia she had that too
when you look at these old black and
white photos you saw Chinese beauty like
any other going back to the time of she
share one couch in the AL Chon and young
way fake except she didn't live in
ancient China she was in LA Chinatown
girl if you close your eyes and listen
to her speak English she didn't sound
any different from the Caucasian person
born on the farm in Kansas except back
then that didn't matter when Anna May
Wong was born 23 years into the Chinese
Exclusion era the white man in America
was still having the time of his life
lording it over his fellow citizens of
color Anna May Wong went through a
familiar childhood filled with all kinds
of mental and physical traumas meted out
by sadistic classmates and neighborhood
bullies these bullies were just kids but
they had to learn about their
superiority and sense of entitlement
from someone guess who that probably was
Anna had the quintessential Chinatown
childhood your family didn't own a
restaurant but they did on a laundry on
the outskirts of Chinatown this is the
old la china town that used to be
located near where alvera Street and
Union Station are today the Chinese
American Museum is also right there on
los angeles street if you're interested
in this particular subject i strongly
recommend a visit Anna May Wong was born
too long some singh and li gan toi
several blocks west of Chinatown on what
is today flower street this was a 1905
because she was born just before the
chinese new year it was still the year
of the dragon in LA it had already been
a good 34 years since the largest
s lynching in US history went down on
calle de los negros october 24th 1871 19
chinese men were murdered by an angry
mob were strung up with a whip lo de los
angeles historical monument is today she
grew up around that area by anime Wong's
time things have quieted down
considerably but Chinese and all
immigrants of Asian descent despite
their citizenship and worth to the
community still had to you know know
their place Anna May Wong was born into
an interesting time Hollywood was just
starting to take off the first film
studio would open in 1911 on Sunset
Boulevard when Anna was 6 at the corner
of Hollywood and Vine the pioneers of
the industry Cecily DeMille Samuel
Goldman and others we're already making
their first movies stories from the
Orient with all its allure and mystique
have captivated and mesmerised western
people since the time of Marco Polo's
travels so when Hollywood became a thing
in the first couple decades of the 20th
century there was quite a demand for
these exotic tales from the Far East
filmmakers began making all kinds of
movies with titles that suggested
something mysterious and Asiatic in the
earliest years of moviemaking in
Hollywood the weight China or anywhere
in Asia was presented and fetishized
would have any colonialist nodding with
approval the molds that the movie
industry created to portray Asians in
the movies fit nicely into what was
known as Orientalism this term was best
articulated later on by the glade great
Edward Saeed in his 1978 book of that
name in all these earliest Chinese theme
films there was always a steady demand
for extras from the very beginning the
relationship with la Chinatown and
Hollywood was symbiotic first of all
Chinatown was an
is reservoir of Chinese movie extras
whenever some director needed 25 Chinese
or entire mongol horde for some scene in
his movie it said a few buses over to
somewhere on Alameda Street or some
meeting point in Chinatown they're a
bunch of locals looking for a little fun
and chance to make a little supplemental
income piled on the bus and got to be an
extra in a movie and if a scene needed
to be shot in China no need to hop on a
plane as backdrops and scenery went
Chinatown head at all and you didn't
have to bust in any extras Anna May Wong
went to every movie she could she was
one of those young American girls who
fell in love with the possibilities the
movies offered and like many American
girls at the time crossed this great
land she dreamed of becoming a movie
star and she had a better chance than
most she lived in LA and when she was
old enough she was able to join all the
neighbors and auntie's and uncles and
get these bit parts as an extra in a
Hollywood production then 45 cents she
could one day go see that movie and
there she'd be on the flickering screen
14 years old Anna May Wong got her first
chance to be in a movie and that was it
the bug better and she was in for good
she was still going to school so bad was
the tormenting of Anna and her sister
Lulu they believed the local mainstream
public school and continue their
education at a chinese school run by a
mission she did learn to speak read and
write chinese well everyone deserves a
break and anime Wong's came in 1922 when
she appeared in a movie called the toll
of the sea she had just left Hollywood
high after her second year to have a go
at this Hollywood thing she was already
five foot seven and gorgeous because she
had the body she had been taking on all
these modeling jobs with local
department stores and these high-end
fashions look fabulous on her director
Chester Franklin cast her in the part of
lotus flower in this first true
Technicolor film then her life changed
life changing as the role was it was
sort of typical of the kind
rolls open to any chinese american
beauty in her role as lotus flower which
got knocked up by a white guy and then
tragically gives the baby up to the man
and his wife and then she goes and
drowns herself the 1920s american movie
going public wasn't ready yet for any
Suzie Wong getting cozy with a western
leading man so these kinds of roles were
sort of standard fare handed out to
Asian actors like a consolation prize a
guy by the name of Douglas Fairbanks
senior saw her the toll of the sea and
decided he wanted her for his next
picture Douglas Fairbanks was the Tom
Cruise Brad Pitt Harrison Ford of his
day miss 1924 movie was going to make
was called The Thief of Bagdad it's the
film he's best known for Anna May Wong
played a mongol slave the film was the
Titanic of its day and no one in 1924
didn't see it small though anime Wong's
part may have been the row made her a
star nineteen years old beautiful and
elegant the roaring 20s and full swing
the Jazz Age Hollywood in its infancy
Anna May Wong plunged in headfirst and
lived it up as a flapper appearing in
vaudeville and movies with names like
the chinese parrot mr. wu old san
francisco shanghai express streets of
shanghai across to singapore in
chinatown charlie yeah she had a steady
flow of work between her modeling and
acting Anna May Wong was doing great but
the roles she played in these
black-and-white films were all minor and
undistinguished more often than not
these films and the characters portrayed
we're just denigrating to Chinese people
who you saw an Asian person on the
screen they had to be sinister evil a
cheater or a murderer or all for the
Chinese beauty she was always a slave or
a prostitute and the plot would always
require some Caucasian man to rescue her
and whatever happened to her in the end
you could bet it would be tragic and
wherever China was concerned a favorite
theme was often the westerner who goes
to chai
to save the country there were no lead
roles for Chinese end of story and back
then you can't believe this but they
used to have these anti-miscegenation
laws that not a simple level basically
said no mixed marriage is allowed and
all that that implied so no public
displays of affection or intimacy
between an afro american or asian and a
caucasian like on stage in the theater
or in a movie for example now that in
itself is pretty shocking but the real
zinger is that this law wasn't
overturned by the Supreme Court until
1968 and loving versus Virginia all the
way into my own lifetime what this meant
to Anna May Wong and anyone else asian
was that they never got the chance to
kiss the lead not only was something
like that too shocking for the times it
was illegal so what you had in Hollywood
was this whole concept of yellow face
non-asians would be made up to look
Asian like Al Jolson and black facing
and mammy and because they were members
of Club Blanco it was ok for the man in
black face or yellow face to be as
intimate with the Caucasian woman as the
times permitted the go-to girl back in
those days if you needed in Asia was
Myrtle I despite the Chinese sounding
last name she wasn't Chinese her real
surname was Williams after Anna May Wong
was passed up in favor of Myrna Loy for
the lead in the nineteen twenty-eight
movie the Crimson city that was it
another case of someone in yellow phase
in the lead and the bit part going to
the Chinese Anna May Wong in this case
Myrna Loy played a lot of asians until
1934 is the Thin Man catapulted her to
stardom so after she kept running into
this brick wall enemy wants at the hell
with all that she headed off to a more
civilized place and from nineteen twenty
eight to nineteen thirty she was the
toast of Europe she was there the same
time as Josephine Baker two women of
great talent sophistication and beauty
who were second-class citizens in their
own country but in Europe they were
feted by royalty aristocrats in lid two
phones
germany and england at all gorgeous
california chinese movie star i was
quite a sensation on the continent
wherever she went everyone wanted to be
close to her or at least be seen with
her and all those years of modeling the
latest fashions had taught Anna May Wong
a thing or two she knew how to dress
well and get the most out of the latest
fashions in Paris she was quite a
sensation was able to get the kind of
work that didn't restrict her to being a
maid a prostitute damsel in distress or
some role that fit the stereotypes
demanded by American audiences she was a
huge hit in Paris Berlin at London
playing roles on the screen and on the
stage that would have been off-limits to
her in America she even learned how to
speak German fluently Paramount Pictures
lured her back to Hollywood in 1931 this
was the year Pearl Buck released the
good earth but Anna May Wong despite her
best hopes just picked up where she left
off after her European experienced the
whole being Chinese and Hollywood had
lost its allure 1932 saw her playing a
prostitute named who Faye who commits
murder and the biggest movie of that
year shanghai express the actor she
murders were in full yellow face in the
movie was named Warner Oland more about
him later this movie which starred
Marlena Dietrich did well and although
the part Anna May Wong play just stoked
the fires of American Orientalism she
was critically acclaimed 1932 by the way
also saw the release of the mask of foo
Manchu with Boris Karloff playing the
lead foo Manchu was another pejorative
character representation of the Chinese
and the so-called Yellow Peril the term
Yellow Peril have been around since
German emperor Wilhelm the second first
coined it in 1895 these Foo Manchu
movies later became sort of a joke in
our day but in the early days of
Hollywood this character always played
in yellow face of course did a lot to
maintain these negative attitudes toward
Asians
in the 1920s and 30s only letting up
slightly during World War two when we
were allied with China against Japan
anyway Anna May Wong went back to Europe
again where she felt appreciated and
respected at her own merits while she
was in Europe word had spread that MGM
was casting for the movie version of the
good earth this was a big book the movie
mags stoked the fires but good about how
fantastic this movie was going to be was
hyped like crazy pearl bugs book won the
Pulitzer Prize in 1932 it was a big deal
in the movie going public couldn't wait
to see it it took three years to make
the good earth Anna May Wong was a
shoo-in for the lead role of olin she
knew and pretty much everyone knew it
was only fitting that Hollywood's best
known Chinese American actress played a
lead in this blockbuster in the making
well then perhaps the defining moment in
anime Wong's life and career the lead
role into german-born Louise Reiner who
had won the Best Actress ask or the year
before the great ziegfeld and besides
despite Pearl Buck and everyone else's
desire to make this an all asian cast
the producer Irving Thalberg said Paul
Muni was going to play one long and that
was carved in stone and you now it is
mid 1930s was crazy anti-miscegenation
laws the final decision was to give the
lead role of olin to Louise Reiner as
for the role of the former prostitutes
are nigh concubine Lotus the books
antagonist that was offered as the
consolation prize to Anna May Wong she
said screw it and decided for the first
time in her life to visit China and so
once again Anna May Wong escaped from
the disappointment that was Hollywood
and arranged a tour of China februari
1936 Hollywood royalty arrived in
Shanghai I'm not going to say it was
like Beatlemania but it was quite the
sensation when it all happened it was a
big deal for the newspapers and
magazines it was a gift from heaven only
no one was looking for sleaze she got
the complete and total star treatment
Anna May Wong also got call
that this was inevitable from Chinese
who gave her an earful about these roles
she always played that denigrated
Chinese in general this wasn't just
anime Wang many other artists and
entertainers were also criticized for
this and often had to defend themselves
but overwhelmingly she was a big hit but
the Western and Chinese Prince and of
course little Shanghai wanted to rub
elbows with her and have their brush
with greatness Wang some sing Anna May
Wong father had by now already retired
to his village outside tai shan in chun
on in April 1936 she paid him a visit
back then and probably still today this
place was quite rural and in front of
all the villagers and people assembled
who got to witness the spectacle wang
some saying basked in the glory of his
magnificent daughters success she walked
arm-in-arm with her father all the
villagers gawking and craning their
necks takapa gander and she looked
elegant and stylish walking with her
father through the village wearing a
dark cheap Paul slit up to the thigh
that village in Taishan had never
witnessed a day like that before and
probably since so father and daughter
both got to live to enjoy this moment of
success of parental pride in achievement
together her success was his success
this ten month trip invigorated her but
then came the fateful in bloody year of
1937 and for Anna May Wong it meant a
lot of entertaining and fundraising for
China during the nation's most desperate
hour she performed in Canada and Alaska
raising money for China and also
entertaining American troops and
remember while she's still serving her
country in this manner 1937 the anti
chinese exclusion laws were still in
effect for six more years so that's how
Anna May Wong spent the war years
Hollywood couldn't grind out enough of
these anti-japanese Pro nationalist
movies and appeared in several with
names like lady from Chongqing daughter
of Shanghai bombs over Burma on the
march thirty first nineteen thirty-eight
cover of the new look
magazine Anna May Wong graced the cover
beautiful as ever but holding a dagger
stained with blood with the words
printed the world's most beautiful
Chinese girl that was the year the new
Chinatown opened in LA in June it was
billed as a place where Angelenos could
go enjoy quote the enchanting charm of
old China in Los Angeles and when the
war was over that was pretty much it the
end of anime long story the demand never
slackened for Asian actors and actresses
to play roles such as cooks crooks
gamblers opium smokers laundry man you
name it and a lot of these guys play in
these parts they were American born and
raised but they did they knew how to
speak that perfect chinglish you know
Hollywood had such a powerful impact on
American people's perception of China
Chinese culture Chinese people and even
what China looked like I said whenever
they needed to do a scene in China all
they had to do was drive to Chinatown
and there was always some jaws house
alley or restaurant that provided the
perfect setup or back trap so of course
people who didn't know any better saw
this and thought oh China so fascinating
well the whole yellow face syndrome
continued on seemingly forever Anna May
Wong tried to face it down but in the
end it was too much she proved herself
in Europe and felt the applause here in
her birthplace at least as far as the
film and entertainment industry went she
was trapped inside a stereotype she
pretty much dropped out of sight into
the late 40s and early 50s sort of
retired to Santa Monica invested in real
estate and managed an apartment complex
she appeared on TV and the occasional
movie nothing big then a nice chance
came when it was announced the Rodgers
and Hammerstein Broadway hit the Flower
Drum Song was going to be made into a
movie and with an all-asian cast boot
and it was invited to try out for the
part of auntie Leon but she was not able
to enjoy the comeback or the success
this may have brought to her at februari
third 1961 she laid down to sleep and
her Santa
apartment and died from a heart attack
the cause of death was cirrhosis of the
liver brought on by chronic alcoholism
and you might be interested to know the
producers looked far and wide for
someone else to play auntie Leon from
Seattle to Key Largo and Kennebunkport
to San Diego not one Asian actor could
they find let alone a Chinese one the
part ended up going to Juanita Hall an
african-american there's another woman
I'd like to introduce to help tell our
story unlike Anna May Wong she enjoyed a
very very long rich life dying well into
her 90s this was J Dean Wong she was
born Anna May Wong the May spelled ma e
rather than ma why in marysville
california May twenty-fourth 1913 she
changed it later to Jay Dean today
Marysville is about a 45-minute drive
north of Sacramento in one time during
the height of the gold rush it was one
of the major hubs of Chinese immigrants
in Northern California the Chinatown
there was centered where the buck guy
temple is today they seem young near the
banks of the Yuba River at first and oak
Sun yat-sen did once visited Marysville
to consult with local Chinatown leaders
anyway by februari 1886 with the anti
chinese exclusion laws in force most
everyone of Chinese descent was either
roughed up and chased out of town by a
mob or had bolted of their own volition
and the Chinese community in Marysville
never recovered but that's where Jaden
Wong was born but it was in Stockton
where she grew up and was most
associated with in her younger years
like Anna May Wong was a years her
senior and millions of others across the
country Youngjae Dean Wong dreamed of
getting into the entertainment business
but she wasn't just a movie star she was
a full-blown entertainer an actor singer
dancer and comedian all rolled up into
one she grew up in the same America as
Anna May Wong I don't know if they ever
knew each other Jaden long story was
somewhat familiar after graduating from
high school she ran away to Hollywood is
a team
appeared in a few movies the experience
wasn't what she thought it would be and
before long she went back to Stockton to
regroup the decade of the 1930s that was
Jaden's first great decade when she had
her Hollywood period appearing in the
kind of films that perpetuated the same
old cliches hardwired into the popular
American consciousness she did a few
Charlie Chan films and all the while
actually since childhood she took
dancing lessons she was a dancer first I
guess he could say that was Jaden long's
particular passion then the great
charlie lo appeared on the scene what a
guy when he came to San Francisco stodgy
old Chinatown it was still awash in the
comfortable old traditions kept alive by
the generally conservative inhabitants
in 1938 he opened the Forbidden City 363
sutter between grant and stockton this
was right on the outskirts of Chinatown
that ended one block north at bush
street filmmaker Arthur dong has
produced the definitive documentary on
this subject his 1989 Forbidden City USA
and the accompanying book tell the whole
story and what a story it was Charlie
low against the better wishes of china
town elders open this club it was all
decked out with the kinds of Chinese
interior decorations that we all know
and love it was a full-blown soup to
nuts entertainment paradise late 1930s
there was no TV back then no internet
Vegas hadn't been invented yet the LP
record was still a decade away when
adults wanted to go do something because
there was so little to do at home they
went to these supper clubs cocktail
lounges and in the major markets there
would be these deluxe clubs where they
had everything Charlie Lowe's forbidden
city was one such club there were
dancers comedians acrobats floor shows
of every kind and the booze flowed in
torrance it was a place like no other it
was slow going at first for Charlie low
but after introducing little TNA the
lineup it was like turning
magnet and the crowd started to creep in
he found Noel toy doing some artistic
nude modeling over on Treasure Island
the bainbridge just opened in 36 Noel
toy with her scandalous bubble dance and
fan dance really gave the Forbidden City
some momentum and the club started to
take off other risk ax followed Noel taw
including quote China's most daring
dancing doll Kobe ye two things really
caused a place to skyrocket to legendary
status one was the bombing of Pearl
Harbor that got us into the war the
other was a spread in Life Magazine in
the december nine nineteen forty issue
those two events brought in a crush of
soldiers in town on our an hour and
curious tourists locals both Western and
Chinese all looking for that small taste
of the exotic orient the place had to
offer again I want to mention that name
Arthur dong in doing all my reading on
the subject of not only these stars like
Jaden Wong and Anna May Wong but the
whole big subject of the Asian American
experience in the entertainment industry
his name kept coming up is the great
chronicler of these times Forbidden City
USA in 1989 and Hollywood Chinese in
2008 and most recently a documentary on
dr. highest more anyone who saw his
performance in the killing fields will
know why he won the Oscar that year in
this category the Forbidden City spawned
a whole slew of entertainers some of
whom went on to memorable roles and
movies and on TV Jaden Wong was just one
of many artists who were able to use the
place as a launching pad to bigger and
better things other similar clubs and
lounges popped up in San Francisco the
Chinese sky room Kubla Khan lion's den
Dragon's Lair club Shanghai and others
each of these names attached to the
Forbidden City and there were dozens and
dozens all had their own story to tell
and some of them are just fantastic
they're quintessentially American and
the theme of hard work
and making something of one's life in
this land of opportunity again Arthur
domes Forbidden City USA I'll put a link
to his deep focus productions on my
website Jaden Wong performed at the
forbidden city for years and after the
life spread she tried her luck in New
York their version of the forbidden city
was called the china doll from 1946 to
1951 Jaden Wong wild the crowds who came
to see her perform there there was a
whole subculture that existed called the
Chop Suey circuit it was an informal
network of places like the Forbidden
City that existed in all the China towns
and the big markets the owners were all
guys like Charlie lo locals who had a
foot in both the Chinese American and
the mainstream American worlds the
heyday for this period was from the
1930s to the 50s Jaden Wong played them
all then like Anna May Wong before her
JT Wang went to Europe stayed for five
years she also entertained at US
military bases and was embraced wherever
she went she once had to bail out of an
aircraft that was going down over the
Black Forest in Germany she parachuted
out survived and walked through the
forest to make her gig that night with
Bob Hope but home is where the heart is
and upon her arrival in America she
quickly learned things weren't like they
used to be television in the u.s.
started to take off in the early 50s by
1950 for more than half the country had
a TV set in their house that ended up
putting a major damper on the nightclub
scene now people could sit at home with
a whiskey sour in one hand maybe some
chips and dip in the other and be
entertained right in their own living
room that's the USA that Jaden one came
back to she was already 33 years old
when the Flamingo opened at Vegas in
December 1946 after an initial stumble
Vegas took off and became a new gateway
to opportunities for established and
up-and-coming entertainers to try and
make it after she had come back from
Europe she tried her luck in vegas she
saw the competition for dancing gigs and
new and aging battle-ax like her despite
still being a knockout
at 40 years old was going to be an
uphill fight so like many entertainers
who came before and after her Jay Dean
Wang put together an act and played the
clubs and lounges Anna May Wong couldn't
get good parts in Hollywood Jaden Wong
couldn't line up any decent gigs at any
club or establishment now what it would
hire her at first it was the Asian thing
again but for someone who had the guts
to dance on the street corners for
nickels as a little girl in order to
afford lessons something as little as
rejection wasn't gonna make her give up
she did become a comedian and appeared
everywhere inside and outside the Chop
Suey circuit the poconos the Catskills
and all those resorts in the Jewish Alps
and upstate New York known as the
Borscht Belt she married three times and
said she was always too busy to have
kids and when she became too old to
carry on her stick she opened up her own
talent agency in the 70s and for the
rest of her days like the great Betty
Lou before her she hustled for hundreds
and hundreds of asian-american aspiring
entertainers with heads filled with the
same dreams of Anna May Wong and so many
others except by the time the 1960s came
around the trail had already been
blazedd most of the obstacles that held
asian-american entertainers back didn't
exist anymore or at least like they used
to the pungent odor of blatant American
Orientalism was still in the air but
that would slowly dissipate as the
decades passed for 30 years Jaden Wong
ran a talent agency some of the most
familiar names she nurtured were John
loan she got him the part in the last
emperor joan chan luu celio bai ling and
the well-known and multi-talented
playwright screenwriter librettist want
children best known as david henry hwang
of m butterfly Fame he said of Jaden
long when she passed at March 30th 2010
quote the character of Madame Liang in
my 2000 to rewrite of the Flower Drum
Song was my tribute to Jaden a brassy
brilliant ex actress turned agent for
oriental talent an innovator in a
pioneer J Dean was the quintessential
Broadway Dane
bursting with foot spa never less than
glamorous a show girl with a show girls
body to the end end quote she was a New
York institution the JD muah on the ward
was set up to help aspiring Asian
American dancers and choreographers to
make it in their field there are so many
stories and I'm happy to say many of
them are quite well documented I've
mentioned Arthur dong is one of the best
known but there are many other writers
filmmakers curators and others
passionate about the subject there's
quite a record my purpose in this
episode isn't to tell the whole story or
mention all the names but merely to let
you know this story is out there and
it's a great one Anna May Wong Jaden
Wong just two examples many of these
Chinese stars of old Hollywood in order
to legitimize their tail ends would have
to be compared to the big American
mainstream names of the day Larry Ching
the Chinese Sinatra the Kin lose sisters
the Chinese Andrews Sisters even Noel
toy when she was showing her boobs to
1930s audiences was the Chinese Sally
Rand Dorothy toy the Chinese Ginger
Rogers toy ottmar the Chinese Sophie
Tucker choy Hong the shinies Chaplin
Barbra Jean Wong the Chinese Shirley
Temple Joseph son jus the Darryl zanuck
of Chinatown yeah it was always like
that so today in this episode of the
China history podcast let's remember
them for their achievements their lives
and perseverance are really a great
inspiration you may recall in that
history of Hong Kong CHP 108 episode i
discussed Nancy Kwan she just turned 76
years old this year in 2015 in that
episode we saw how she was sort of the
first to break the sound barrier in her
role as Suzie Wong opposite William
Holden let me add she was not just Nancy
Kwan she was also called the Chinese
Brigitte Bardot what thief of bagdad was
to Anna May Wong that's what the world
of Suzie Wong and the Flower Drum Song
were too
see Kwan but after those two big
Hollywood hits it was a slow and steady
downhill ride for Nancy Kwan as far as
any mainstream Hollywood rolls she too
despite breaking new ground in the
industry couldn't find parts that
deviated from the usual stereotypes but
like Jaden Wong Nancy Kwan didn't let
that get her down although she didn't
perform as much she still stayed on the
fringes of the showbiz and his head of
happy and productive life inside and
outside Hollywood and still looks great
not easy when you're pushing 80 I myself
have never been in the movie business
and never had to audition for a part I
can't speak for today's Asian American
actors and actresses but it appears
progress has been made all the
asian-american stars of today
established and up-and-coming Oh a
degree of thanks to those that came
before them and put up with the worst of
the BS doesn't hurt to remind ourselves
every now and then about the kind of
conduct in American society that was
once considered acceptable we won't be
shaking our heads and thinking how did
this happen but it happened and a lot of
Americans put up with it for a long time
1882 to 1943 more than 60 years Chinese
in this country put up with the
exclusion acts because only they were
targeted for this exclusion in this
country it sort of implied that they
were fair game for other kinds of unfair
treatment so I thought all this was
worth mentioning and talking about ok
after 239 years United States still a
work in progress I don't know why they
had four actors play Charlie Chan and
not a single one was Chinese swedish
american actor Warner Oland was the most
famous Charlie Chan in one of the poster
boys for the whole idea of yellow face
MGM made 20 Charlie Chan films in the
1930s the whole decade saw Warner Oland
and Sidney Toler in the lead roles but
at least the Honorable sons were Chinese
and of all Charlie Chan's brilliant and
insightful sons nobody achieved more
fame and honors than number one son
played by the unforgettable in
multi-talented key Luke he played
Charlie Chan's number one son and maybe
half a dozen or so Charlie Chan films he
also appeared in the good earth and from
nineteen thirty nine to nineteen forty
one he was the original Kato and the
Green Hornet preceding Bruce Lee by 27
years and those of us old enough to
remember the early 70s surely remember
ki Luke as the blind Master PO in the
nineteen seventy to seventy-five TV
series kung foo yeah Kung Fu David
Carradine playing quite Chang Caine and
yellow face key Luke he was prolific and
got to play a few nice roles in his long
career and lived to the ripe old age of
86 Victor sun-young to was a Charlie
Chan son number two but he's probably
best known as hop sing and the classic
Bonanza series that ran from nineteen
fifty nine to nineteen seventy three he
was the Chinese cook employed by the
Cartwright's Benson Vaughn was another
of the great Hollywood legends aside
from being Charlie Chan's number three
son he was well-known face in 1950s and
60s television and of course is
businessman Tang Wu in the nineteen
sixty eight Disney flick the Love Bug in
LA Benson phone was also known for his
chain of iphone restaurants he was born
and raised in Sacramento California and
once described himself as quote half a
pound oriental and eight ounces Yankee
Sammy tone was another graduate of the
Chop Suey circuit in the 1930s and 40s
but he didn't do too bad went on to fame
is Peter Tong the house boy who worked
for John Forsythe in the nineteen
fifty-seven 1962 TV series bachelor
father that was a big show in its day
and Sammy Tong was practically a
household name back then tragically he
took his own life in October of 1964 at
his apartment and palms maybe 15 minutes
away from where Anna May Wong died three
years before he took an overdose of
sleeping pills and left a note that read
quote I have taken my own life no one is
to blame end quote and who can forget
Chin Ho Kelly on the old Hawaii five-o
series
played by cam phone convo his chin ho at
Zulu as kono book em danno I never
missed an episode it ran from 1968 all
throughout the 70s Kam Fong came from a
dirt-poor existence in Hawaii as a young
newlywed he was working as a welder at
pearl harbor when the Japanese attack
happened then several years later on jun
8th 1944 there was a freak accident were
to u.s. bombers collided in midair and
crashed into his home when his family
was inside killing his wife and two
children there are so many of these
familiar names and faces I could go on
and on mentioning each one and their
particular achievements all these past
grades Nana Mae wang j dean wong tai chi
lisa lu Barbra Jean Wong and so many
others and the man I just named plus
other acclaimed artists like James Hong
and the great cinematographer James Wong
how you can say they all played a
starring role in the history of these
chinese legends of old Hollywood I'm
going to put a few links on my webpage
for all kinds of resources you could
find about the Asian American experience
in Hollywood that really was the main
theme of today's topic I'm hardly a
movie critic or a podcaster for that
matter so I didn't want to present this
episode as a critique of these stars and
the movies they appeared it I just
wanted to offer a quick overview of
these times in America and to give you
an appreciation of how drastically
attitudes have changed since then so I
hope you enjoyed that there's still
enough time to get your own set of
historic tease of China I received mine
the other day inside this all natural
bamboo wouldn't gift box are five
wonderful tease discussed in the epic
CHP 10 part series on the history of tea
chea guan yin da Hong Pao huang shan
mall phone long jing and two kinds of
pool are if you're a coffee drinker
can't stand tea they make great gifts
for someone who does the bamboo box has
a great after use when all the tea is
gone and after all these years I'm
finally giving you a chance to show your
support for the China history podcast by
getting yours today
make that call go to tea sense com t EA
s ii and z dot com the ordering process
is easy and here i am in my state of the
out recording studio in a secret
location los angeles enjoying some right
now i'm off to china right after Labor
Day September ninth I'll be in Guangzhou
shantou ningbo shenzhen & hongkong south
of the youngs the kind of trip this time
i might get an episode uploaded on the
road we'll see i already hit the topic
picked out this is laszlo montgomery
signing off once again here in the
Southland in the city of Los Angeles
barely half an hour away from the Walk
of Fame on Hollywood Boulevard if you
want to go see Anna May Wong star it's
at 1708 vine she got it on februari
eighth nineteen sixty a year before she
passed please consider joining me next
time won't you for another exciting
episode of the China history podcast